# la-liga-analysis-public
Public view of the la-liga-analysis repo: A statistical paper using regression techniques to analyze factors contributing to home-field advantage in the La Liga soccer league

### **If you would like to see the code implementation and paper, please get in touch with me with the methods outlined on my resume, or use the provided links on my resume. I cannot distribute this code publicly due to academic honesty guidelines**

The private repo contains the full dataset from Kaggle, R code, paper, and presentation.
Below is the outlined intro of the paper:

### <u>Home-Field Advantage in the La-Liga Professional Soccer League</u>
#### By Riley Kim Connell, Albi Marini, Nathan Pearce
**Introduction:**
Soccer is considered the world’s game. It involves two teams of eleven players competing to score goals by kicking the ball into their opponent’s net. Each official match lasts 90 minutes, split into two halves of 45 minutes. Goals are awarded when the ball fully crosses the opponent’s goal line. Important performance metrics used in statistical analyses include “corner kicks,” awarded when the ball exits the field off a defending player, and “shots on target,” defined as a shot that would score if not saved. The league structure typically consists of multiple teams competing regularly over a season, during which points are earned based on match outcomes (three points for a win, one for a draw, and zero for a loss) with the team accumulating the most points crowned as league champion at the end of the season.

Many fans and analysts of soccer often like to scrutinize the factors that play into each match, especially at the highest level. Out of these factors, many believe that the concept of “home-field advantage” plays a major role in determining the likelihood of whether or not their preferred team will win. Home-field advantage refers to the proposed advantage that a team may have when playing on their “home field”, that is, the venue at which they usually practice, versus at another location. In literature regarding the topic, it is typically defined as home teams earning more than 50% of the total points or wins in a league’s games (Hill & Yperen, 2021).
It is often said that home-field advantage plays a tremendous role in boosting a team’s morale. In fact, a meta-analysis of professional athletes across various disciplines, including soccer, found that “generally, athletes report more positive psychological states when playing at home” (Jamieson, 2010). From the surface, this idea seems to make perfect sense: playing against an opponent with tens of thousands of fans cheering for you, without having to travel far, just seems inherently easier than traveling hundreds or even thousands of miles to play in a hostile environment (Jamieson, 2010). For example, some outdoor stadiums tend to see much less favorable weather conditions than others, leading to the away team having a further disadvantage as they may be used to playing in clear conditions. This has been implied by research conducted that showcased when teams relocate to a new stadium, their performance with home-field advantage would tend to dip temporarily (Pollard, 2002). Additionally, many people feel as though the officiating crew tends to favor the home team, most likely because they do not want the crowd to be upset at them (Pollard & Gomez, 2014). It has even been previously observed that in matches played during COVID-19 without spectators, referees were found to favor the home team less, showing that these claims are not baseless (Reade et al., 2020).

Despite these anecdotes, the notion of home-field advantage has been observed by past research. In fact, a meta-analysis of home-field advantage across various sports leagues found that “the home-field advantage for soccer was significantly stronger than that of any sport” (Jameison, 2010). In this paper, we try to corroborate this idea of home-field advantage in soccer by examining its weight in La Liga, the elite Spanish soccer (or football) league. Previous studies have found that home teams in La Liga capture about 62.1% of the points scored during the season (Miguel et al., 2009). This is in line with what has been seen in other top European leagues like the Premier League and Bundesliga, which see the home team with 55-60% of matches or points scored during the season (Hill & Yperen, 2021). The problem, however, is that many of these studies have observed home-field advantage without controlling for the various factors that may go into determining the outcome of a match, as they are more akin to pure data analysis of previous match results. Through our approach, we will attempt to fit a statistical model for the outcome of a match in La Liga to control for these outcome predictors, allowing us to determine whether or not home-field advantage as a factor of our model has a measurable impact on the expected outcome of a match in La Liga.
